# research-paper

## Quantitative Evaluation of AI-generated Recipes for Health Recommender Systems

Abstract—The rise of generative Artificial Intelligence (AI)
has created the possibility of presenting novel recipes, i.e.,
recipes that do not exactly match any known recipe and this has
led to the creation of AI-based recipe recommendation systems.
AI-based recipe recommendation has the possibility of accom-
modating a variety of preferences – including a person’s current
health (e.g., diabetes), health goals (e.g., weight loss), taste
preferences, cultural or ethical needs (e.g., vegan diet). However,
unlike recipes recommended or created by a human dietitian,
recipes created by generative AI do not guarantee accuracy, i.e.,
the generated recipe may not meet the requirements specified
by the user. This work quantitatively evaluates how closely
recipes generated by OpenAI’s GPT4 large language models,
created in response to specific prompts, match known recipes
in a collection of human-curated recipes. The prompts also
include requests for a health condition, diabetes. The recipes
are from the largest online community of home cooks sharing
recipes (www.allrecipes.com) and the Mayo Clinic’s collection
of diabetes meal plan recipes. Recipes from these sources are
assumed to be authoritative and thus are used as ground
truth for this evaluation. Quantitative evaluation using NLP
techniques (Named Entity Recognition (NER) to extract each
ingredient from the recipes and cosine similarity metrics) enable
computing the quality of the AI results along a continuum.
Our results show that the ingredients list in the AI-generated
recipe matches 67-88% with the ingredients in the equivalent
recipe in the ground truth database. The corresponding cooking
directions match 64-86%. Ingredients in recipes generated by
AI for diabetics match those in known recipes in our ground
truth datasets at widely varying levels: between 26-83%. The
quantitative evaluation is used to inform the development of
a web-based personalized recipe recommendation system for
diabetics that uses OpenAI’s GPT4 model for recipe generation.

**[Link coming soon]()**
